# ES6

## What is ES6?

ES6, also called ES2015, refers to a set of language features that were added to the ECMAScript standard in 2015.

**Cool, what's ECMASript?** It's a standard that JavaScript tracks. For our purposes, it _is_ JavaScript.

**2015?** Yes, that was a while ago now, but browsers are still in the process of adopting the new features. There were more additions to JavaScript in 2016, also known as ES7. These changes weren't as drastic, or perhaps exciting, as those of ES6, which is why you don't hear much about ES7. More changes are set to be adopted this year, which will be ES8/ES2017. The entire set of modern features from ES6 and on is sometimes referred to as "ESNext".

## Why do I care?

The language features of ESNext are _awesome_. They enable you to write more concise, easier-to-read and easier-to-maintain code.

**That sounds great, but can we just do React for now?** If you look at the React docs, you'll see they are written with the assumption that the reader is familiar with ES6. Modern JavaScript language features (ES6, ES7 and beyond) are widely used in the React development community. Whether you're reading blog posts, studying source code or browsing questions on Stack Overflow, you're going to see them in use frequently. So, it's very helpful to have an understanding of them. And it makes your code **more fun to write!**

**If some browsers don't support ES6, why does anyone use it?** Great question, with a simple answer: [Babel](https://babeljs.io/). Babel takes your ES6 (and beyond) code and transpiles it into browser-friendly ES5. If you use Create React App to start a project, Babel is built in so your production build is ready for deployment. And browser support for new language features _is_ coming to browsers. All of the JavaScript features we'll talk about in this lesson except module imports can be used _right now_ in Chrome - try them out in the dev-tools console!

**Is JSX ES6?** No. JSX is the XML/HTML-like syntax you can use _in your JavaScript_ when creating React components (and there are other frameworks that use JSX as well). Babel _can_ transpile JSX to plain JavaScript, though - just like it transpiles ES6 JavaScript to ES5.

## ESNext features we'll cover here:

  - `const` and `let`
  - Arrow functions
  - Object literal shorthand
  - Template literals
  - Imports and modules

## Some of the features from ES6 and beyond we will _not_ cover:

  - [Promises](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise)
  - [Async](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/async_function)/[Await](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/await)
  - [Generators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Iterators_and_Generators)
  - [Classes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes)
  - [Array spread](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Spread_operator)
  - [Array and Object destructuring assignment](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment)
  - [Object rest spread](https://babeljs.io/docs/plugins/transform-object-rest-spread/)

## `const` and `let`

`const` and `let` are new keywords for declaring variables. Where before you would have declared

```javascript
var x = 1;
```

You can now declare

```javascript
const x = 1;
```

or

```javascript
let x = 1;
```

`const` is short for "constant", which means a `const`'s assignment can't change. This does _not_, however, mean that a `const` is immutable. JavaScript assigns by reference. This means that if you change a property of an object, or add an item to an array, its reference, and therefore its assignment don't change. If I assign an object literal as a `const` variable like this:

```javascript
const anObject = {
  hi: 'hello',
};
```

I can then add a key to it, mutating its value:

```javascript
anObject.newKey = 'some value';
```

The new value of `anObject` is now:

```javascript
{
  hi: 'hello',
  newKey: 'some value',
}
```

This is valid, because `anObject`'s reference doesn't change.

However, if I assign a `const` to a [primitive](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Primitive) type (a string, number, or boolean, for example), I can't change its value at all.

```javascript
const hi = 'hello';
hi = 'goodbye';
```
 
The code above will throw an error, because I attempted to change the reference to a const.

[This CodePen](https://codepen.io/andrewdushane/pen/jBYzbm) illustrates this. Click the little red exclamation point to see the error.

That is what `let` is for. The value and reference of a `let` variable can change, so this will run with no errors:

```javascript
let hi = 'hello';
hi = 'goodbye';
```

Open the console (at the bottom of the window) in [This CodePen](https://codepen.io/andrewdushane/pen/mWpxVy) and you'll see that the JavaScript runs, and "goodbye" is logged to the console.

When declaring variables using ES6 syntax, if you need to declare a variable whose value will _not_ change, declare it as a `const`. If the variable's value _will_ or _might_ change, delcare it as a `let`.

`let`, like `var`, can be reassigned as much as you like. Why use `let` then, why not just use `var`? Since `var` in javascript is scoped to the nearest parent function, using let is more predictable and straightforward.
Here's an example of the difference between how `let` and `var` are scoped from MDN:

```javascript
function varTest() {
  var x = 1;
  if (true) {
    var x = 2;  // same variable!
    console.log(x);  // 2
  }
  console.log(x);  // 2
}

function letTest() {
  let x = 1;
  if (true) {
    let x = 2;  // different variable
    console.log(x);  // 2
  }
  console.log(x);  // 1
}
```

You can see this in action in [This CodePen](https://codepen.io/andrewdushane/pen/oZpqxO) - open the console to see the difference.

With more predictable scope, `let` variables are easier to keep track of visually than `var`s, and less likely to introduce bugs to your code.


## Arrow functions

The arrow function is a more concise syntax for declaring functions. Arrow functions are not _only_ different in syntax, however - their scope is also different from a regular `function` declaration.

### Basic Syntax

Using the function keyword, to create a function that adds two to an argument, you'd write:

```javascript
function addTwo(num) {
  return num + 2;
}
```

Using arrow syntax, you'd write:

```javascript
const addTwo = num => {
  return num + 2;
}
```

Or, we can simplify it further using an implicit return:

```javascript
const addTwo = num => num + 2;
```

You can play with arrow functions in [this CodePen](https://codepen.io/andrewdushane/pen/qrpoav). Remember, you can also use ES6 syntax in the Chrome dev-tools console, and your Create React App projects are transpiled with Babel, so you can use ES6 there too.

### Implicit return

If there is no block following the arguments of an arrow function (meaning no `{ }` brackets), whatever follows is the return value of the function. The third `addTwo` example above returns the value of `num + 2`.

Using implicit returns can shorten our syntax and make it more readable. The following function `lowercaseListOfWords` takes one argument, an array of strings, and returns a new array of lowercase strings.

```javascript
const lowercaseListOfWords = arrayToModify => arrayToModify.map(word => word.toLocaleLowerCase());
```

Written with functions, this would look something like:

```javascript
function lowercaseListOfWords(arrayToModify) {
  return arrayToModify.map(function(word) {
    return word.toLocaleLowerCase();
  });
}
```

One gotcha to be aware of with implicit returns is that object literals must be wrapped in parentheses, so the interpreter (browser, compiler, etc.) can distinguish them from blocks. An example:

```javascript
const isItActive = isActive => ({ active: isActive });
```

Because this function implicitly returns an object literal, it must be wrapped in parentheses.

Play around with implicit returns from arrow functions [in this CodePen](https://codepen.io/andrewdushane/pen/XMVENB).

### This binding - and the lack thereof

Arrow functions don't change the definition of `this`. So, if `this` is already defined in the scope, and you call an arrow function, you can access `this` directly. In non-arrow functions, every function defines its own `this`. This might look familiar:

```javascript
someElement.on('click', function(e) {
  e.preventDefault();
  var that = this;
  doSomeAsyncThing().then(function(result) {
    doSomethingWith(result, that);
  })
})
```

Another popular variant is `var self = this`. However you like to do it, you don't need to do it anymore!

The equivalent arrow function:

```javascript
someElement.on('click', e => {
  e.preventDefault();
  doSomeAsyncThing().then(result => doSomethingWith(result, this));
})
```


## Object literal shorthand

Object literal shorthand is a simple but useful bit of syntactic sugar. If you want to assign a variable as the value of the key of the same name, you don't have to write it twice. _What?_ It looks like this:

```javascript
const price = 100;

const item = {
  price,
};
```

This is the same as

```javascript
const item = {
  price: price,
};
```

Less to write, and less to read when you come back to it. A win-win!


## Template literals

Template literals bring us string interpolation in JavaScript. This means we can create dynamic strings with more readable syntax.

```javascript
const name = 'Mike';
const greeting = `Hi, ${name}.`;
```

Before string literals, this would have been

```javascript
const greeting = 'Hi, ' + name + '.';
```

Combining an arrow function with a template literal, we can do this:

```javascript
const greet = name => `Hi, ${name}.`;
```

[Try it out in CodePen!](https://codepen.io/andrewdushane/pen/WpdzZE)

## Imports and modules

In ES6, you can import modules directly without declaring them as global variables. This makes namespacing your app a non-issue. Before module imports, namespace was often a primary concern in JavaScript.

So, if you want export my `addTwo` function as a module, you can create a file called "addTwo.js":

```javascript
const addTwo = num => num + 2;

export default addTwo;
``` 

And in another file, say "app.js", i can import it:

```javascript
import addTwo from './addTwo'; //

addTwo(3);
```

You can also export multiple modules from a file, like so:

```javascript
export const addTwo = num => num + 2;

export const addThree = num => num + 3;
```

And somewhere else:

```javascript
import { addTwo, addThree } from './arithmetic';
```

## Additional Resources

  - [Ben Ilegbodu - React + ES next = ♥ - React Conf 2017 (video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jh_Qzi-yHU0&index=7&list=PLb0IAmt7-GS3fZ46IGFirdqKTIxlws7e0)
  - [es6-features.org](http://es6-features.org/#Constants)
  - [Node Green - ES Next features available in Node](http://node.green/)
  - [Babel - Transpile ES Next to ES5](https://babeljs.io/)
  - [JSBin - Play with ES Next](https://jsbin.com/)
